Hi, everybody.
Up to this point in the course Charles and
Di have presented already a lot
of material which included
both material that can be found in
traditional quantum mechanical textbooks.
And also some nonstandard
exposure to quantum physics.
For example,
super conductivity pet integrals.
Some elements of quantum liquidation etc,
etc.
And I have to say that on my side
the preference has been for the latter.
I wanted to tell you more about
things that you cannot find
in traditional textbooks.
But today is certainly going to be
an exception because today I'm going to
present a very traditional quantum
mechanical problem that no
reasonable quantum
mechanical course can avoid.
And this is the problem of
an harmonic oscillator.
So the reason I cannot avoid
this problem is two-fold.
So first of all quantum harmonic
oscillator the problem of quantum harmonic
oscillators relevant to a variety of
various experimental systems ranging from
atoms where atoms are trapped in
a quadratic potential to let's say
molecules who's low energy oscillations
I described by [INAUDIBLE] oscillator
to quantization of [INAUDIBLE] to
quantization of oscillations in crystals.
So for [INAUDIBLE] we are going
to discuss them soon.
And many, many other things.
And second, so
the problem on the theoretical side,
the solution to the problem, a harmonic
oscillator is very illuminating and
useful in that it gives
you very useful tools.
So called creation and
undulation operators that
are useful in a variety of contexts
across various fields of physics.
And you're going to see these things very
often in other courses if you pursue
physics studies.
But before solving the quantum
harmonic oscillator problem,
let me remind you the story behind
the classical harmonic oscillator.
And here I have an example of
a classical system which exhibits
these small oscillations in year and
equilibrium position and
these oscillations exactly
are the harmonic oscillator motion.
So, on the mathematical
side what happens here,
of course,
is that the mass here experiences
the so-called Hook's force which is
proportional to the displacement,
x, of the spring relative to
its equilibrium position.
So, let's say here,
if this is my X-axis, and
let's say we have an equilibrium position
somewhere here, so this is my zero.
So, this is X, and the force is
proportional to this displacement, and
in this case, at this moment in time,
it's this Hook's force.
In these directions,
in the negative x direction.
Now I can write this words of
course as a minus gradient,
in this case its just one
dimensional gradient, or
just the [INAUDIBLE] with
respect to x of some potential.
And to produce a linear
force of course I need
to differentiate the quadratic potential.
So in this case it's kx
squared over two and
this is exactly the potential
energy of a harmonic oscillator.
That eventually is going to appear
in our Schrodinger equation,
the quantum version of this problem.
Now, the classical side though, what I
have to do is I have to solve the second,
Newton law, represented here.
And so the second Newton law,
of course is just mass times acceleration.
The second derivative of x
is equal to all the forces.
In this case, there is just one force,
in this example, is if we ignore gravity.
Which is not going to modify too much.
But in this case it's going to
be just one force which
is the force due to the Hook's law.
And if I write this equation, if I divide
this equation by m and instead of writing
the second derivative, I will write it in
the compact form as with two dots on top.
So I can write it as x to dust
plus an ingenuous squared x
is equal to 0 where Amanda is equal
to the square root of key over m.
And as solution to this
differential equation is the sines
or cosines to some arbitrary phases and
it's up to us which solution to choose.
So there will be a some amplitude here
amplitude here so we can choose a sin or
we can choose a cosine.
And as long as we have two free parameters
which will determine the initial
condition, the initial position,
the initial velocity these are all general
solution of this classical problems.
So let me choose for example the sin
solution and present it here.
So this is this solution to
this harmonic oscillator.
Now to move further, let me choose
a particular initial condition
which I can do which creates response
to x of t equals 0 being 0, so
let's say the initial moment of
time are the position of our on
harmonic oscillator was exactly
the equilibrium point just for
simplicity and
in this case this is my solution.
Now if I want to find the velocity of
the oscillator as a function of time so
all I have to do is to
differentiate the position.
And in this case it's
going to be just x naught,
some amplitude of the oscillations
times omega times cosine of omega t.
So what I can do now, I can write
the energy of this system which is not
a function of time as we shall see
in accordance to the conservation
law which would be a sum of the kinetic
energy mv square over 2 and
the potential energy v(x).
Which is equal to one-half kx squared,
k is the coefficient in the coefficient
in the Hook's Law or expressing it
through the mass and frequency.
I can write it as so.
One half, and my omega squared, x squared.
And this is by the way, the form in which
it typically appears in the literature.
In particular,
in quantum mechanic literature.
So now indeed if we plug in
this result into the energy.
And so the energy is going to be
equal to mv squared over two, so
we're going to have m over 2,
x naught squared, omega squared,
plus cosine squared of omega t.
From this velocity and
potential energy plus m over 2, x squared,
x naught squared, omega squared
from here Sine squared of omega t.
And then we can use the fact that
cosine squared a, an arbitrary angle,
plus sine squared of the same
angle is equal to one.
And so we see that indeed
the energy is simply this.
And the energy is conserved.
Indeed, in accordance with
the energy conservation law.
But of course even though the energy
E here is not a function of time.
The two terms in this equation,
the kinetic energy and
the potential energy,
are functions of time.
So x is a function of time and
the velocity is a function of time.
But they work in unison with one another
in such a way that this sum is a constant.
And if we plot this, so let's say
the x axis here is going to be m omega
times the coordinate, and the y coordinate
here is going to be the momentum.
So we see that this trajectory,
basically in the phase space, describes
the motions of the harmonic oscillator.
It's a motion on a circle.
And the radius of the circle is
determined by the energy of our harmonic
oscillator that we, and this motion is
a face portrait of this classical system.
And by the way I will just mention in
passing that there is a relation between
the face portrait of classical system and
the corresponding special quantum systems.
But that's the only thing I'm
going to say here in this regard.
So now let us move closer to
the main subject of today's lecture
and make the oscillator quantum.
The motivations to do so
are many as I said, so
for example we can think about
instead of having a classical mass on
a classical spring, we can talk about
let's say two atom molecules and
the oscillations of this molecule relative
to the equilibrium position of the atoms.
So at low energies these oscillations
are going to be described
by quantum harmonic oscillator.
So of course, there are many
more examples, as I mentioned,
in the beginning of the lecture,
let me just mention another one.
So for instance,
if we're talking about the behavior
of a quantum particle in a rather
arbitrary potential, v of x.
Let's say something like this.
So if we are interested in low energy
behavior of the particles, and
we're near the minimum of the potential,
we can always expand the potential
of the effects near the minimum.
So it's going to be v of x not.
So this point, plus v prime of x not,
x minus x not.
And this is zero,
because this is the minimum plus
the second area over 2x over
minus x naught squared.
And model of this overall constant which
just shifts the minimum of energy and
this shift of the equilibrium position and
this shift the equilibrium position.
So the remaining part of
this potential is really,
quadratic potential that we
have in the from problem.
So what I'm saying here is that
you can always almost always
approximate a reasonable
potential well near
the minimum of the well with
the harmonic oscillator.
You have a smooth function.
Of course if you have a square
quantum well we cannot do that but
in most cases you have
a smooth potential and
in this case we can just replace it at low
energies with this harmonic oscillator.
Okay, so now let me erase this stuff,
and move further.
So how to formally go from the classical
harmonic oscillator in this potential
to quantum harmonic oscillator.
So to do so, we have to pretty much do
the following mathematical procedure.
We can just put a hat here and that's it.
So that's how we make
the oscillator quantum.
So, well seriously what do we have to do,
we have to replace the energy of
the oscillator, so the energy remember
we derived in the previous slide for
the classical harmonic oscillator.
So now we replace the energy of
the oscillator with the Hamiltonian
which is an operator.
The momentum which is just a variable
in the classical description.
Now we replace it with the operator
that detects on the wave function and
in principle we can put the hat also on
top of the coordinate, although the action
of the coordinate on a wave function in
position space is pretty simple action.
It's just a multiplication operator.
But this pretty much what
it means on the mathematical side to
make the go from classical description
with no operators involved to a quantum
description with operators involved.
So this is the.
And the problem that we
want to solve now is to
find solutions to the eigenvalue problem.
So, of course, it's a time independent
problem, so there's no time involved.
And what we want, we want to find
a solution to this equation.
So when solving this Shrodinger equation,
and
in particular when thinking
about the allowed energy levels.
So what we should keep in mind about
this harmonic oscillator potential
is one property that makes it very
different from what we have seen before.
Namely that this potential grows,
the potential energy
grows indefinitely to infinity as x
becomes very large or very negative.
So there is no room here for
a plain wave-like solutions
propagating to infinity.
And the only thing we may have here
are discrete states corresponding to
particles localized in the vicinity
of this x equals zero.
And to determine these energy levels, this
harmonic oscillator spectrum, is exactly
the main problem we're going to be
focusing on in the next couple of videos.